Welcome to the Data Science Hangout. I'm Rachel, be your host. If you're joining
for the first time, thank you for joining us. Special welcome to those who have
been joining us week after week. Great to have you here. If this is your first
Data Science Hangout, this is an open space for the whole data science
community to connect and chat about data science leadership, questions you're
facing, what's going on in the world of data science. I'll just add this too, if I
transport into the future and you're watching this on YouTube for the
first time, you can also join us live and we would love to have you here. So there
should be a link that I'll make sure we'll put in the YouTube descriptions
too. Just like to reiterate, we love to hear from everyone no matter your level
of experience or area of work as well. But with all that, I'm so happy to be
joined by my co-host for today, Mike Smith. Mike is a Senior Director of
Statistics at Pfizer. Mike, I'd love to have you introduce yourself and maybe
share a bit about your work.
Sure. So I've worked at Pfizer for 29 years this year. I have started in
statistics group. I then went to the modelling and simulation group in
clinical pharmacology, where I was essentially leading or kind of helping
mostly with the simulation side of things. So taking models that other
colleagues have built and then doing predictions or simulations for clinical
trial design to try and assess operating characteristics and, you know, come up
with the most efficient design possible. So I've then moved back to statistics
now, where I am, I call myself a professional geek. Okay, so I have looked
after our installation, our package sets, getting that into the hands of my
colleagues, kind of looking at what's coming out in the RU ecosystem, finding
out what packages, you know, essentially being at the bleeding edge of what's
coming to help train them, but also, you know, prevent that wheel spin where
instead of every colleague having to do, you know, look at different tables
packages and going, oh, what's the pros and cons of all these different tables
package? If I do that, then I can provide a kind of best guess for them to
come up with that. Last year, before Rinforma, I did a little poll and found
out that over 1500 colleagues had downloaded R. So if you can imagine, I'm
an R subject matter expert for somewhere in the region of, you know, between
600 people who are on my MS Teams channel, and, you know, the 1500 who've
downloaded it. So I'm trying to, you know, service that community, build a
community, find out what other people are doing and share that. Lastly, I should
say that we're a very decentralized model within Pfizer where for data
science and using R, there are pockets of people throughout all of Pfizer who
do some really awesome stuff with R. And, you know, so I'm in this new center
of excellence team that we're just setting up. I'm trying to kind of build
connections between all of those SMEs and also help the teams where there
isn't an SME available. So cat herding is definitely on my job description,
professional geek. In fact, we talked about it at last week's meeting, which
is about being that translator role between the users, the business people
who are out there doing stuff and need solutions with R and the technical side
of folks who are building things. I definitely sit in that space. So I, you
know, I'm here at data science hangout, but I've never fitted a machine learning
model in my life. So if you've got questions about that, you'll need to turn
to one of my esteemed colleagues. But for the translation bit and the general kind
of cat herding, that's why I'm here.
I love it, Mike. That's so impressive that Survey had that many respondents
too. I'm curious how you even launched that out to everybody.
I didn't. I have a means of querying the Microsoft database that sits behind the
process that people grab R. And so by querying that directly, I can pull out
how many people have got R.
I see. That's awesome. So I see I had asked a question in the chat if you want
to jump in.
Yeah, sure. Nice to meet you, Mike. That's awesome to hear. Congrats on 29 years.
That's that's very impressive and inspiring. So I guess the question would be,
that's a lot of our users. And is there some central infrastructure that you guys
leverage to make sure that your environments are kind of consistent between
all users or kind of all the teams kind of have their own little infrastructure?
We've had R installed on our high performance compute grid now for many, many
years. So like 15 years or so. So for production use, that's where colleagues
should be running things. And within the last three years, really, we've got R
Studio product. So we have R Studio Server Pro. And in the last two years, we've
This brings up a whole can of worms set because, and I should say that desktop now,
I'm kind of saying to colleagues, look, if you load up R on your desktop and you
download packages from wherever, and I don't know what you've got, and I don't
know what versions you've got, that's effectively your sandbox. You know, don't
so that you don't have to worry about that. You don't have to worry about
versions you've got, that's effectively your sandbox. You know, don't so that the
other bit that goes with this is that anything that we submit to regulatory
agencies, we need to know what version you run, what packages you used, and it
needs to be reproducible in the long term. So the regulators can and sometimes do
come back to us 10 years later and say, can you rerun that analysis, but look at
this subset or add in this data or, you know, questions like that. So we need to
be able to run stuff from 10, 15 years ago. So that's why I'm kind of saying to
them, look, you know, leave your desktop for playing. Because when you go to a
conference tomorrow, and you have to load up a set of packages for this workshop
you're on, you'll forget to swap back to the standard set.
Right. Wow, 10 years. A long time.
Yeah, I mean, the other funny side of that is that on the HPC grid, we have
version R191. Right, but I don't know how to program it anymore. I'm so used to
tidyverse and new ways of doing things that I'm gonna like, ah, it's gonna be a
problem.
Thanks, Mike. I see there's a few anonymous questions coming in right now
as well. And one is, what are the differences between being a director of
statistics versus, let's say, a director of data science?
I'm a senior director within the statistics department. So if you're a
senior director within the data science group, you might be doing, as I said,
the data science is used broadly in many, many different places at Pfizer for all
kinds of different needs, you know, like in drug development terms, they're
building machine learning models to look at the aspects of like, when you actually
compress the tablet, you know, does that hold together? Machine learning is used
there, machine learning is used in real world data. So outside of the clinical
trial process. So really, the kind of distinction between, you know, me sitting
here doing my stuff being a professional geek in stats versus being sitting
anywhere else within Pfizer doing data science, you know, it's, we all kind of do
the things that we need to do. But the, there isn't, there are many people whose
role will be called data scientists. But we don't necessarily have a data science
department. If that helps answer that question.
Yeah, and I think that kind of touches on your question in the chat as well, Frank,
if you want to jump in.
So for sure, it touches on it. Maybe a slightly different way to think about it.
But I don't think there's going to be a really concrete answer here. The
difference between data analytics and data science, or like what's called
statistics and data science. People have said to me like, who cares, right? Like
they're both, they're using these tools and these methodologies, and we're all
solving problems, making decisions using data. It matters, though, right? Like,
especially at large corporations like Pfizer or like Target, you use these
terms and people automatically, right, especially non-data people, like have
these automatic perceptions of what they are. And they're like, okay, this many
dollars over here, this many dollars over here, like more headcount for you, less
for you. So, and like, the problem is, though, everyone had, we all know, like
everyone on this call, I think knows, it's so messy, right? Like the delineation is
so messy. And I was curious, I don't know, if you have perspective on that,
cool. If not, I can understand that, too.
Yeah, I mean, the place it seems to matter, Frank, is in job descriptions
when you're posting for new positions. I think, kind of my experience is that
there are people throughout the organization who are making decisions
with data or helping others make decisions with data. But, you know, those
could be called statisticians, those could be called data scientists, you
know, clinical pharmacologists and pharmacometricians that I talked about
previously are building models, right? It's not necessarily, you know, deep
learning or XGBoost, but it's nonlinear mixed effects modeling and doing that
kind of stuff. So, I think once you're through the door, that distinction really
melts away.
Right, as you said that, I thought, is it worth thinking about it, right? If I'm
interviewing for a data X role, is it worth asking, how closely do I work with
the users, the operators, the decision, whatever, like call it whatever you
want, the decision makers, and maybe that gives the person interviewing better
context for maybe, like realistically what they'll be doing, right? The data
scientist that never gets to work on ML is going to be confused, right?
Yeah, yeah. No, that's right. So, I guess I'm just conscious of the fact that if
you go and type in data scientist into the Pfizer careers website, you're going
to get a whole heap of jobs. But you're also going to look at some of them and go,
but that's not data scientist as I understand it. Right? Yeah. And, you know,
you're right, when you're doing your job, you don't want to get into a job and
realize that no one has ever used machine learning, never used machine learning
models in this space at all before. And that's, you know, well, why was I hired
here? But at the same time, you know, people are in many pockets using data to
make decisions. And I think, you know, that's a, that's a common skill set,
regardless of whether you've ever fitted a machine learning model.
Absolutely. Okay. I appreciate it.
Yeah.
There are a lot of great questions coming in. And I'm not going to try and group
them together on topics. It's too hard at the same time. But I see, Ethan, you
asked a great question around hiring, if you want to jump in and ask that.
Yeah, I just want to Hello, Mike. Nice to meet you. I just want to ask the
questions around hiring advisors, because I remember your one of your posts is
about hiring practice. And I think you recently implemented some of the hiring
practice at Pfizer, mainly around like problem solving. So just wondering what
sort of skill set, expertise matter more. But Pfizer, do you look for MET students
who has a bit of knowledge and you train them up in R? Or do you look for people
who are proficient in R with a bit of interest in clinicals and medicines, and
you can build that expertise at all?
That's a really good question. I think it depends on the role. Right. So as I
mentioned, the clinical pharmacology, pharmacometrics and stats groups, they're
likely to come in with either clinical pharmacology or pharmacy degrees and learn
R as they're doing it. Same with statisticians. But right at the minute, I'm
looking for technical R specialists who know how to turn an expression of a
problem into an R thing, whether it's a function or a package or Shiny app or
Markdown report. So it really is context specific. We're such a massive
organisation that it's, you know, if you come in with a physics degree, but you
have a long history of developing really cool R packages on GitHub, you know,
that's that I want to talk to you. But for stats roles and typically within the
stats department, within the ClinPharm department, they're looking for people
with that specific background or degree. And then they'll learn R and various
other things.
Thank you.
I think seeing that R Centre of Excellence in the job positions helps a
bit too for getting the word out there. I see there was an anonymous question too
that was what are the standard gaps in background knowledge in a new data
science hire?
Right. Well, I mean, obviously, we're all looking for the unicorns, right, who
have all of the skill set. And it is a tricky problem when you're hiring and
you're trying to weigh up the strengths and weaknesses of each of the candidates
or trying to rank them. With the roles I have in mind for the R Centre of
Excellence, obviously, strong R skills are prerequisite for that. But then after
that, you get into these things of, well, has this person got experience building a
community? Because obviously, that's another big feature of this role. Have
they got experience at problem solving? So the kind of translator role, if you
will, that we talked about before of when you hear a problem, your mind's thinking
over, how do I solve that problem using things I know about packages or apps or
functions? And so if the person is really strong on one or more of those things,
then you can often fill in the blanks. And, again, I'm sorry, but it's largely
role dependent. There are very few people that arrive fully formed and that you can
just go, yeah, you work, get to work. And I would just say that I think that the
people that we bring in, you know, you would try and help them plug the gaps that
they have. But I think it's hard if someone's completely missing something. If
they have some experience, but you know, it could be increased or better, then you
can work on that. And, you know, as long as the kind of core things you're looking
for are there. I mean, I'm delighted to hear how other people who are hiring, try
and make that call. Because it seems to me it's very hard.
And feel free to jump in, everyone.
Give people a few more seconds. Stephen, you're just unmuted if you want to jump in.
Just to add, in my experience, the issue is finding people who can wrangle data rather
than do machine learning. Everybody wants to do machine learning. You have to understand
the data before you can learn from it.
Yeah, yeah, that's, that's certainly true.
Good point. I know it's been a while since we also did introductions to so feel free
to introduce yourself when you ask the question as well. Jordan I see you asked a great question
earlier in the chat too if you want to jump in.
Okay, what a weird angle. Yeah, so if I remember correctly, my question was about any pushback
that you've had with sort of introducing R into the workspace as opposed to the sort
of assumed a giant within pharma SaaS, assuming that there's many people in there that are
very amazing SaaS programmers who still blow my mind today. But have you had any, have
you had to work with that sort of, well we already have SaaS and SaaS programmers, why R?
Yeah, that's certainly true. I mean, it's, it's fortunately that decision kind of has
to come from the managerial level. So the kind of top level within the programming organization
has, you know, if they make that call that we are going to transition from SaaS to R,
you know, I can't push from the bottom up because it's just the number of people's too big.
But if that person decides and it comes down from, from that level, then you've still got
a battle, because there are some people who, you know, feel well, I'm a competent SaaS
programmer. I know nothing about R. How the heck do I make a switch? And that's where,
you know, you need to train and keep training and, you know, try and help those people make
the switch. There are many good kind of SaaS to R training courses available now. And,
you know, there are many R training courses, which are really excellent. One of the places that I find
you can do a really quick win is if the SaaS programmer knows a PROC SQL, then if you show
them dplyr, it's kind of like, well, okay, those two things look broadly similar. So you just swap
those in and you're off. And the other place, of course, is in the back end of stuff of
visualizations and markdown and, you know, things like that, that, you know, SaaS programmer,
those are things that SaaS doesn't do quite so well. And so you can win hearts and minds in that
sense. And then you're kind of gradually migrating towards it.
Coming up on that too, there was an anonymous question that was what's the proportion of SaaS versus SPSS
versus R versus Python at your organization?
Well, within the stats organization, it's about 50-50 SaaS and R. For I would, being a statistician,
of course, I'd like a breakdown of, you know, years of experience, because it seems to me that people
who are coming in now to the organization are much more likely to have seen R at college
and, you know, done stuff at college with R compared to SaaS,
because it seems to me that, you know, in the way that we used to work, we would bring people in and then train them in SaaS
because the cost of entry there is fairly high. I can't speak
about the rest of the organization, but yeah,
that's what I've seen just within the stats group.
Thank you. Another question that was asked a bit earlier was what is the trend of data science
job in big pharma like Pfizer? Will adopting R and big pharma
then SaaS increase the data science jobs?
I don't know that it's related to
the software. You know, the thing that's indisputable is that the amount of data
we're getting is just getting more and more and more and more and more groups
within the organization are turning to people who can wrangle that data
and make decisions and present back evidence for making a decision
using tools, whatever those tools are. And back to the original point
that Frank made, is that person a data scientist? You know, that's for someone writing the job role
but we're getting much more data,
much more is being asked of us with that data. And being a
regulated industry, we need to be able to present that data back to regulators
and to underwrite our claims and provide evidence for them to make a decision.
I'm sorry if that's horribly vague.
Whoever asked the question, if you demand more information from Mike
into the chat. But Sam, I see you asked about Shiny. Do you want to jump in
and ask that question?
And I can of course read the question if you want to jump in and add more context, please feel free.
But Sam asked, how do you see Shiny being used at Pfizer in the next few years?
It's increasing
a lot over the last five years, certainly. Five years, is that fair?
Certainly, let's say two years.
I'm seeing many groups who feel that everything needs a Shiny app.
Every solution is Shiny shaped.
Because the instant that people want to do something interactive, that's where they turn.
But with Shiny comes an overhead, right? Because you've got to host it somewhere, you've got to maintain it.
And then you've got to think about how to not just maintain that code
base, but then improve on it and make sure that it works with the next generation of whatever.
So I'm trying to kind of be a counterbalance to that
to say, is the interactivity you're looking for served via like Plotly
or via a parameterized R Markdown report or something like that?
So, yeah.
But the interactivity that people have with Shiny means that you can set something up and provide guardrails
for whoever's consuming that app to look at their data more,
slice it, dice it, look at subsets and just understand what's going on in the data much better.
So, yeah, I can see the appeal, but I'm also trying to say, well,
is that really the right tool for this situation?
That's a great point.
Do you also have Tableau or some other kind of visualization platform?
So there's a balance there, right? Because you don't want to start replicating stuff in Shiny that can clearly be done
in another platform that you're honestly already paying for.
Hey, Zeus, I see you have your hand raised if you want to jump in.
Yeah, I just had a question. So you were seeing this push to relabel
some data scientists as research software engineers. And so that's what I would describe
myself. So I'm at a U.S. national lab now, and we have people that come to us that have data
science problems. And so we help code that product or that problem in R
and maybe deploy it until we have an RStudio Connect server. Would you feel that's kind of the best
way to describe what data scientists, some data scientists are becoming? Or do you think adding this term
research software engineer into the word cloud is just going to be more noise?
Oh.
And of course, there's also MLOps, which kind of describes it too.
Yeah, I know what you're talking about.
And I think that, you know, you could also describe large parts
of what I see some colleagues doing as research software
engineer. That would describe quite well what some people are doing.
But again, it's back to terminology. And it's, you know, if you describe
your role as a research software engineer, then will anyone outside of that group really
know what you're doing? It may also, to be honest, it may depend
on what part of the organization you're sitting in. Right. So if you're more aligned to
an IT department, you know, people might be like, yeah, I totally understand where you're coming from and what you're doing.
If you were within statistics and you described yourself as a research
software engineer, people might say, well, what are you doing sitting in statistics?
You know, and it's just, I guess, with a company the size of Pfizer,
you know, and with this, even the size of the statistics group, which is 200 people,
you know, it's then you have to try and tell the people within
the organization what it is you do. Yeah. Well, you know, I know in pharmaceuticals
and a lot of my classmates went on to do this and they became SAS
programmers, right, at pharmaceuticals. And you can consider that a software engineer, right? They really don't do any statistics
anymore. They just help people write SAS code. Or, you know, if you had someone that had some
R code and they wanted to package it and, you know, they don't know how to make a package, they don't know how to deploy
that package, they don't know how to host this package, that's where a research software engineer would step in.
Yeah. And I'm sure there are people within the organization who are essentially doing that.
In fact, one of my colleagues that I work closely with is probably doing something very much like that
job, but I'm not sure what their official job title is.
I can imagine for people looking for new jobs, it's hard as well with so many different titles.
Right. What do you search for? Right. Nessa, I see you asked a great question
in the chat a bit earlier, if you want to jump in.
Yeah, I can do. This is obviously me asking a question for my own personal benefit.
But yeah, I was, let me scroll up to what I actually said. Yeah, I was wondering
if you'd worked with any synthesis chemists who had turned into data
scientists and particularly asking in the sense of what
do you tend to lack from a data point of view? I mean, from my point of view, you know, my entire background
is in chemistry. I would like to stick with that, but
turn it into more of a data perspective on chemistry.
Yeah. We had a discussion internally with
some folks in the pharmaceutical R&D group who are
pharmaceutical sciences group, who are the colleagues who are designing the, you know,
turning the molecules into tablets essentially. And, you know, the skill set they were looking
for in people doing data science, there was a massive overlap with
what the statistics are part of the world we're looking for,
you know, in terms of managing code, writing
the appropriate tools, maintaining them, rolling them out, as well as
machine learning bits. I think
it depends on whether you're saying, I want to become a data scientist and then come and work over here
within a completely different realm, you know, do data science, but in finance or do data science
somewhere else. As we discussed last week, I think where we were talking about
is it easy to, you know, come with or the question that was asked earlier,
if you come with the domain knowledge, you know, we can teach you some bits over here, but if you move to some
other bits, then you're relying on like the data science bit being really super strong and then
learn the domain. Now,
I personally think that the domain knowledge I've picked up allows
me to more effectively solve problems within my domain.
Right. So, you know, when scientists comes in and it can't really express what they
want in terms of, you know, nuts and bolts, is that a shiny app? Is that a markdown?
That bit doesn't matter to me. It's like, tell me what it is you're going to do with this, you know,
user story. Then I can think of, you know, how do I solve that problem?
That's good. That's helpful. Thanks.
Thanks, Mike. And thanks, Nessa, for the question too. I see Sam, you asked one in the chat
and I can read it for you. I actually wanted to ask Mike the same question.
You said it's really cool to see Pfizer's commitment to our programming via the R Centre of Excellence.
What led to the creation of this initiative within Pfizer?
So. As I said previously, we are
very kind of decentralised, disparate folks. So there are subject matter
experts throughout the organisation. And what we saw was that it's
hard sometimes to get an effective strategy across people.
You know, because it's such a big company, if six people within statistics,
that's like six out of 200, are doing some cool stuff in stats, then
it's easy for each other to know what they're doing. And do we have six people who are all trying to write
the same function or the right access to the same data? Could we not then
say, well, let's solve this problem once and then make that into a package and serve that out to everybody
so that then that streamlines their workflow for the future? We also saw that there are
places in the organisation, and as we were kind of discussing earlier, that lots of people want data
sciencey type stuff or research software engineer type stuff of build some stuff.
If they don't have an R subject matter expert out there, we want
to be able to help them solve their problem and kind of set them up with a proof of concept
or build something quick, pass it on to them and say, well, here's an R Markdown
report. If you need to change it for a different endpoint or for a different data set, then change it here.
But other than that, you can then see which bits to tweak.
Because we're trying to serve such a big organisation, we're just seeing that having a centralised
place that can be strategic.
Well, let me put this positively.
There's a benefit in being able to solve problems strategically. So we're not just, you know,
get the problem, solve it, get it out the door, move on to the next. But we're trying to say, what pieces of Lego can we
capture so that the next time we see a problem like this, we can lift that up and go, OK, we're just cobbling together
bits here to solve problems quicker or to break things down like you would in building a package
to say, if we put these fundamental functions into place to access data or to render this
as a this thing, then we can offer those to the organisation
via a package or via something that allows other people to solve that problem for themselves.
Because if you don't have that centralised place, then I
fear that many people would just go, I just need to solve today's problem.
This needs to be done by tomorrow. I don't have a week to spend on this. But if we've spent a week earlier,
then you could get it done much quicker.
I guess part of my question there, too, is that adding on to what Sam
asked is that I think a lot of big companies know they need something like this.
And like they see all these challenges, but how do you actually go about
making it happen and getting approval to make that a real life thing?
I was very lucky that in September last year, Doug Robinson
joined Pfizer from Novartis and Doug had set up exactly like this
RCOE in Novartis. So when he walked through the door, I
pinned him against the wall and said, we need what you had. We then went to
the head of SAP programming and said,
how about it? We'd like to do something like this. Fortunately, she said
110% behind you. So then she could then be our primary sponsor
and set the next layer up to say this is what we'd like to do.
But it's still quite the thing when you make the pitch to the global head of biometrics and data management to say
we'd like to set up this group and have them endorse it
and say, yep, we need to do that.
It's a great thing. Having a champion there is really what you need
because if you're fighting to do this from the bottom, you're going to have a long slog ahead.
Thanks, Mike. So one more question about that then.
So you said finding a champion, but is there another tip that you'd give all of us listening in if we wanted to do this?
Well, I was really lucky
because I found someone who'd done it before. So Doug had the expertise of
who do we need to tell? What do we need to tell them? What is our raison d'etre?
What's our purpose for being? And he had all that kind of ready to go.
I suspect this is probably something that we could add to your community's website, right?
Yes. I was thinking that would be helpful.
What's the rationale for it? Who do you have to speak to? Who do you have to convince them?
How do you convince them?
I know there was a great question that came in anonymously that I missed
at the very beginning, but it was in those 29 years of being at Pfizer,
what have been the biggest changes you've seen in the space at that time?
That's a really good question.
I've been here long enough, but when I started Bayesian analysis,
just don't talk to me about that, Mike. Nobody uses Bayesian methods around here.
And that's flipped now so that people are using Bayesian analysis.
The primary analysis of the vaccine trial was a Bayesian analysis. So that's great.
And this is kind of related to something that Libby brought up earlier,
which is about decision making. We have moved
much, much more to a situation where decisions are being made
off the back of data. Rather than
off the back of project teams kind of saying, well, I saw the last time we had a
compound like this or last time we were in this situation, this is what we did. So that's what we should do this time.
I mean, it hasn't been like that for a long time, but still,
I think it's a big deal that the decision making is now much more, you know, show me a prediction,
show me a simulation, you know, help me make this decision using data that we've got
and off the back of a model or a prediction or simulation.
Thank you. Andy, I see you asked the question
in the chat that it looks like a lot of people have been weighing in on as well. If you'd want to jump in and ask that live.
Hi. Sure. Thanks for taking the question.
So any tips on how to work with the IT folks
when we've got folks in the team who are actively opposed to the open source tools?
And I'll caveat on that. I work in government.
So folks in public health are pretty protective of
what kinds of tools are installed in even their cloud environments.
And so we're having to do a lot of
re-informing and unlearning because the R
they think of when we talk about it is probably circa 2007
R. And, you know, there's really quite a silo between
folks that are gearing themselves towards being data engineers in IT with
IT backgrounds where they're basically, you know, managing a data center and the rest of us
just using the tools they want to deploy, which has been fairly limited to the
Microsoft suite. And, you know, while there's sort of a community
welling amongst the analysts across various programs using RStudio
and wanting to use enterprise-level tools so that we can do code sharing
in a more managed environment than the
kind of Wild West we're working with right now. So any tips on that?
And thanks for the, I got the link to the champions. That's really helpful. I'm sending that link to several colleagues right now.
Okay. So, yeah, I think
actively opposed is a hard one to fight, right? Because you'll then find
people will still fear uncertainty and doubt. And that's
hard to battle against. In terms of my work
at Pfizer, for
over 20 years now, the FDA has said that they don't endorse any specific tool
for analysis. So there's a perception within the company that, oh, if you're
submitting to the regulators, to the FDA, it has to be in SAS. They make the request that the
transfer files that you pass to them of the data are in SAS format. But they've said for many,
many years that they don't care what software you use and they can't endorse any specific
software because they're a government agency and they wouldn't stand behind
a particular company and their software. So we've got that going
for us. But the other part of it that I think is easier to manage
is to take away the kind of wild west side of things. So when we deploy
R at Pfizer, we talked earlier about R and the high performance compute grid.
What we've got now is a process that says we'll take a certain version of R, a certain set of
packages and a certain versions of those packages. We build it,
we test it, we document it and then it goes under change control so that there are no sudden
changes to that instance of R. And it's the same, it's getting easier now because we've got
containers for that. So we can test and validate and qualify and document the container
and then deploy it in various places. What that then means is that as far as
no one can get in and install packages in that environment unless
it goes back through that whole process. So that kind of then takes that wild west away
in that framework. And I'm also militant about
telling my colleagues not to run anything in production on their desktop for the reasons that we discussed earlier
that I can't tell what they've got and I can't tell what state it's in.
So with those two messages, I'm kind of saying, well, look, anything that's on production needs to come from
here. You can do what you like on your desktop, but if you then try and run it
over here, you can't come and tell me, oh, I need to get this package in there
and I need it by tomorrow morning. Because the answer is, well, it needs to go through that whole cycle
in order to have the confidence that this snapshot version here is still valid.
My personal view is that if you lock down something too much,
people will find workarounds. So if you get told you cannot use open source,
you must use this set of products, if that person wants to, they'll find a way
to get around that and to sort it out. So if this way of doing things, the official way,
the good way of doing things is easy, then
hopefully people will do that than this nasty workaround over here.
I like that. Make the good way of doing things easy.
Ismail, I see you added a comment in the chat as well to answer. Andy, if you want to jump in.
Yeah. So I kind of have a little bit of experience with trying to bring
leadership into a line to use open source tools, especially from a financial institution that
sees everything as risk. And actually given examples like Pfizer, like Accenture, like NASA,
that they use R and RStudio consistently, it opens their mind to be like,
oh, maybe it's not so bad. Or, for example, at the beginning, we had this thing with Microsoft Suite 2,
but a 2017 version of Visual Studio Code has an R tools integration.
So until you can prove your point of why it's good and how it's validated,
I think there's ways to do it around it. Sometimes it just takes dedication
and finding the right combination, I would say.
Thank you. I don't want to switch gears to another
topic if anybody else wanted to add anything, too.
I had a quick comment. This is Santiago.
On the subject of how to get folks to adopt the open source, I once met a small team at a bank
and they had this struggle, too. And they worked with the regulators because what they were
working on was regulated. They used our open source libraries and they worked with the regulators
to get everything audited, approved. It took a little bit longer and it was a new process. But by the end of it,
they had an open source process that they adopted and were able to replace their old
SAS systems with. So it's doable. Awesome.
Yeah, I hadn't heard of that before. I thought that was really interesting.
Thanks, Santiago. Colin, I see you had asked a question earlier, I think, in the Zoom chat
around reproducibility. Do you want to ask that one live?
Oh, I don't think we can hear you yet. Unless it's on my end.
I can start to ask the question, too.
So the question is, how reproducible is your analysis? What's the probability of running
an analysis from one to five, ten years ago and getting the same answer?
In terms of just the analysis, I would say that our
probability is high, assuming that that analysis has been run on
our high performance compute grid as a batch job. So if I
take a job that was run a year ago and I rerun it on the grid,
then because that tool is still there, I should be able to completely reproduce that.
As you go further back,
ten years from now, I'm hoping that we'll still have 90%, 95% probability because
we have containers and things are locked down. The place where it gets more challenging
is from ten years ago from now, because
compute grid is a shared resource across many, many different lines in Pfizer,
the environment that the tools are sitting on may have
changed slightly. So compilers may have changed slightly, things like that.
I would say that the probability is still high, but it's
not as high as ten years from today.
I hope that answers your question.
Sorry, we couldn't hear you, Colin.
Stephen, I see you had your hand raised too, if you want to jump in.
I apologise in advance if I derail the conversation, but I'm just curious
as to whether Mike thinks that his role as either a data scientist or statistician has
influenced his music.
Yes, it does actually. Thanks for asking that, Stephen. I'll put the link to my band camp later on so everyone can rush out and buy it.
Yes, I incorporate random stuff, generative stuff into my music.
So yeah, randomness and probability and all of that features highly.
Yes, Mike, please share that in the chat.
Thanks, Stephen. I see, Ethan, you had asked a question earlier as well,
Brown. Friction with introducing new tools. Do you want to jump in?
Yeah, so this is, thank you, Rachel. This is going back to the conversations around
building a centralised tool for everyone to use. Did you have any sort of frictions
trying to get people to use it? Because if people have already built their own tool,
or they're used to doing things their own way, it might be a bit difficult to convince them to start using your tool.
Yeah, so if this is the kind of central container
of R and packages, I always have this friction where
someone will have developed something with a package that isn't on my set,
the official set. And so they'll come and they'll say, hey, I really need this.
Okay. If that happens, and it's like
a version of a package or a package that it makes sense that we should have
included this and we just somehow managed to not include it. It's possible
to kind of layer in that package. We would need to look at the dependencies of that package.
So there's no point in layering in a new package that breaks all the old stuff
because it needs a more up-to-date dplyr. In that case, I would just say to them, well,
now is the time to go back to renv, do this and make it reproducible for you in this project
as a special case. As I said, the layering in of new
packages involves retesting, re-qualifying, re-documenting, signing off, all of that kind of
process. So it's not trivial. And I tend to think that if
we get to that point where someone needs it for tomorrow morning, it's because they weren't paying attention earlier.
When I said, you must use this version over here to do a production run.
So it's possible, it's resource intensive and expensive.
But now we can kind of at least say, well, with renv, create your own little
project, get your own set of those packages you need, because then it's reproducible for
you using renv and we'll deal with making that,
incorporating that package into the next release.
Because RCO made it so easy to create projects and control everything
within. Yes. The thing that I sometimes find though, and this is why
I try and get people off their desktops, is when person X develops some code, passes it to person Y
and person Y goes, oh, it doesn't run. Mike, can you help?
Even with renv, it's a pain to have to take all of that over to here and
reconstitute it and rerun it and see what the problem is.
I would much rather that people kind of work off this standard, because then I know if I use the
Docker and you use the Docker, we can share code, we can share projects so easily.
Do you see moving towards RStudio Cloud, because that way
you can design the same versions? That's kind of what we have with the RStudio
Server Pro. So when you fire up RStudio Server Pro, it will say, what version
of R do you want to run? And basically that's pointing to the container and saying, use this container
with this R and these packages.
That's another option that we have today.
Thanks, Ethan. I know there's a few questions that were asked earlier around this data
culture that you have at Pfizer. And Javier, you had one earlier if you'd want to ask that.
Hey, thanks, Rachel. And Mike, this has been an awesome talk.
I've loved hearing sort of your experiences and what you're doing over there at Pfizer.
But one area where I have seen a lot of R programmers
specifically, I mean, that's what I'm working in day in, day out.
So this might expand to people programming in other languages also. But I've noticed a really big problem
with larger corporations where you have small armies of R programmers.
There's not always a consistent use of syntax
or framing of the code or your apps
or whatever it might be, making it borderline impossible to knowledge transfer
and have someone come in and expect them to take over a complex app build
that was done. And so I didn't know what might be the solution to this.
I hate telling people we need to all code using, let's say,
the Tidyverse style guide or whatever it might be, because I don't want to know.
I don't want to be able to differentiate between individuals when I'm reviewing code.
My code should be indistinguishable from your code. But just in general, what are your thoughts on that?
You're right.
The heterogeneity between people is massive.
Right.
We have statisticians who will turn around and say, I'm not a programmer.
And it's almost like, so you don't need to beat me with a stick about style guides because I'm not a programmer.
There are clinical pharmacologists and pharmacometricians who will also tell me I'm not a programmer.
But they are programming to get the work done for today and get it out the door and answer the problems
and move forward. All I can do for them is to encourage them
and say, look, if you use a style guide, then when this person comes to review your code, it will be so much easier
for them to see what you're doing. And again, commenting and all the rest of that.
And in a sense, I encourage people to kind of use markdown
for those statisticians and pharmacometricians who are doing work, because then you've got why am I doing this
as well as the code that says, and here's how I'm doing it. When it comes to the programming,
programming people, so the statistical programmers who are coding up for
building visualizations and tables and reports,
it matters more that those people follow the style guide.
I mean, it's literally their job to write code that is maintainable
and will last the distance and is easily reviewed. So in that instance, it's kind of, well,
people ought to be following a style guide, especially if that code is going to be reused,
because then it needs to be commented, tested, qualified, all the rest of it.
For everyone else, I can suggest, but I can't really mandate
that people follow a particular style.
I'll comment on that. And a strategy that I end up kind of using is,
yeah, obviously it's great for the team as a whole, but it's also great for that person, for their future self.
And everyone can think of a time where they're like, they look back at work that they've done.
They're like, what was I thinking here? What did I do? And I think when you kind of pose it that way,
you just can encourage them. But I think when they are a better version of themselves,
three months from now, six months from now, that's also a helpful kind of way to kind of push it.
A thousand percent set. I mean, I've said that, you know, if I can, the polite way of saying it,
and I'm kind of rephrasing what I've heard JD Long tweet in the last 48 hours is,
right. When I open up code, even a month later, I often think,
what the heck was I thinking of? You know, if I open it up a year later, it's like,
I don't even recognize who wrote this mess. And that's where things like Markdown help,
because you're leaving that breadcrumb trail that says, this is what I was thinking of,
this is where I'm getting data from, why I'm filtering out this subgroup of people.
My quick that I made at RStudioConf a few years back was, you know,
if you're writing more comments than code, then write them in RMarkdown.
If you're writing more code than comments, write more comments and do it in RMarkdown.
And I think that's leading by example too, where if you're building that community,
when other people see your code, then they kind of are like, wow, it's so much more readable,
so much more easy, and you reduce that mental overhead, I think.
Oh, yeah. Oh, yeah.
I like that, Mike. I see Libby and Hugh are commenting similar comments in the chat,
being frustrated with themselves, looking at something a month later.
I'm at an age where I wander into a room and forget why I came in, you know,
so that's usually only a minute.
Hey, Zeus, I see you were going to jump in.
Yeah, I was going to say, what we have is at the enterprise level, we have a commitment to clean code.
And so, you know, they host workshops or they do lunch and learns,
and they really try to get, you know, people to code better.
It comes from the higher down.
So you might be able to find a champion or find someone to advocate for you on better code development.
And worst case scenario is you just, you know, have a GitHub action or something that lints their code
or styles it, you know, and at least there you have something that's a little bit better to read.
Yep. And there's, you know, control I, is it, within RStudio will indent your code.
Even that's a kind thing.
Hugh, I see you have your hand raised.
Yeah, can you hear me?
I can. I'm very curious if you're in an airport and heading somewhere.
And I'm a time zone behind, so I've missed most of the chat.
I was going to ask, you may have already covered this, but for code standardization,
do you have any good resources you can recommend for further reading?
No, is the very short answer.
I would have to pass that back to the community here.
So for writing standardized code.
If anyone has tips, feel free to put them into the chat or just come on, come on live too.
Sharing snippets is a good start.
So RStudio has features where you can write snippets of code,
so you can type a few words, press tab or shift tab, it will auto complete.
You can share that snippet across the team.
So if you want to do a certain task or certain operations, it's going to be the same code.
Gotcha. I was thinking along the lines of like style guides or that kind of thing that are popular with R or Markdown.
Yeah, that's definitely helpful. Sharing snippets is something we try to do regularly.
I mean, the tidyverse style guide is a good place to start as well, because that's commonly used.
I see Sam also shared the efficient R programming book that Colin wrote.
That's the official plug.
And I can I can take some of these resources here and put them on the LinkedIn group too.
Mike, I know we're a little bit over. Do you have a few more minutes for the other questions?
OK. Sam had asked, is Pfizer using the Golem package for Shiny app development?
Do you have any thoughts on it being used more broadly in pharma?
Yeah. I don't think it's used widely.
I think it's an absolutely brilliant tool.
The reason that I'm saying that is that what I see a lot is colleagues are going from nothing to like a prototype app.
And so the scope of use of that app tends to be within a project or, you know, with a colleague that they'll sit beside and they're just looking at stuff together.
There are a few apps that I know of that have gone from that prototype to full production.
Where Golem and other tools like that really help is in formalising that process and going from, you know,
I've got my thing that works through to something that can be tested, documented, and it's essentially like a package.
And that's that I think is the high kind of waterline, no, the high barrier to or the best solution.
If you're going to then put it into production or even, you know, take it to some regulatory interaction or some external facing scenario.
It's not trivial, though. My one attempt at trying to use it for a semi-complex app because you're encouraged to think in terms of modules.
And if you're not familiar with that, then kind of retrofitting the modules is tough.
It seems to me, though, that if you're wanting to do something quickly and just for internal use, Golem kind of gives you quite a lot of extra overhead.
So what I'm saying is that if you know that ultimately this app is going to go somewhere and go into production, it's fantastic.
Bake it in from day one. But it seems overkill for some other situations where you just want to pull together something quickly so that you can demonstrate the benefits of Shiny.
On that note as well, I know Snap Finance built a wrapper for Golem that they are working on and they want to make that available to the community as well.
So they're going to speak about that at a meetup actually in two weeks. So I just put the link in the chat if you want to add it to your calendar.
Yeah, it's called the Graveler package, which I realize now that both are Pokemon. I didn't know that before.
There's two other questions that are left and one was, when asked for coding help, what is your role? Do you fix the code and send it back to them or are you giving them suggestions and they fix their own code?
That's a good question. I do not want to be the person that, the RCOE I'm really hoping isn't the place where people punt something over the fence and say, my code is a whole bunch of rubbish, fix it for me.
Because that means that we'll always just be there mopping up someone else's mess. I would much rather help people to do better from day one. And that involves them coming to speak to us from day one.
If I am asked to solve a problem and I develop something, as I said previously, I want to get it to the point where I hand back something that isn't going to just induce a massive amount of technical debt.
So I want to provide something that I can say, I'll stand behind this, but the code and everything in it should be tidy enough that you'll know what to change, where to change it and what will happen when I change it.
I hope that answers the question because I'm definitely not wanting to just give like 3000 lines of code or 3000 lines of shiny gap.
Thanks, Mike. And I want to make sure I haven't missed other people's questions. If you're still on now, feel free to just raise your hand and let me know.
I'm going to ask about the roles that you were hiring for. This is anonymously. They said for the technical role that you mentioned about R, what level of proficiency do you feel can be considered?
The technical side of things, actually, we're hiring out of India for the minute, just because we've been told that we are not wanting to fill those roles from US based folks.
But what we're looking for is people who effectively you need to, I would like to see, put it this way, I would like to see what you have on GitHub. So if you can show me good examples of where you've solved problems with R, written packages, written shiny apps, done clever stuff with R Markdown and it's on GitHub, then I would love to see it.
Because, you know, it's easy for someone to say on paper. Oh, yes, you know, I am expert level in R. But it's as we've discussed previously in these sessions, it's hard to know exactly what that means.
You know, whereas if you can show me a GitHub repo, well, great. I can now go and look at your code and see how tidy it is, how it's structured, how you're building things.
Thank you. Irfan, I see you have your hand raised.
Yes. So the last, I was really curious about the last comment. So, when you're looking for someone's GitHub link. So, one, like, I feel kind of like in a find me in the middle of that because when I have done my works for my workplace, a lot of those projects, I can't really share them publicly.
Or even discuss in much detail. And also, it's kind of difficult to find the time to do some extensive projects in my, that can be shareable online. So what would be your suggestions in that case, like people who have some, like, let's say, some years of experience, and they cannot necessarily find the time to build something that can show their expertise, and that can be shareable online.
Yeah, yeah. So, again, this has been discussed in a previous Data Science Hangout, there was some excellent discussions previously about. I think around the lines of this question, we are devising a technical interview that is scenario based.
So, rather than say, you know, get on the meeting, use a sketchboard and kind of show me how you would code this. I mean, that involves you having to know it off the top of your head and nobody codes like that in the real world.
So, the scenario we're looking for is open-ended. It's, you know, this is what we're asking, you know, this is what's being asked for. How would you go about solving that problem with R? And then talking kind of in general terms about, you know, which packages might be involved, how you would solve that problem.
And certain aspects of that problem as well, like, you know, if the data is sitting in Pfizer's servers, but you want to make it a Shiny app, how do you get the data from here to the Shiny app?
You know, because I think having someone explain to us the ins and outs of that process will tell me a little, will tell me much more about how, whether they understand the technical aspects of building that thing than live coding or anything else like that.
It relies on me having a wee bit of knowledge about how I might approach it. But if the person in that interview is covering all the different bases of security, you know, what happens if someone does something in an app that is unexpected? Does it fail gracefully? Does it not? How do we handle that? How do we ensure that, you know, we can check and test the app before it gets deployed?
Those kinds of questions. I think if someone can answer those well, that's fantastic. If I can augment that by looking on GitHub and seeing what they have, so much the better.
Okay, great. Thanks.
Thank you. Thank you all for the great questions, too. I feel like there were so many questions during the session. Thank you, Mike, for sharing with all of us. I know you shared a bit earlier your LinkedIn and maybe email, but is that the best way to get in touch with you, LinkedIn?
Yes, frankly.
Awesome.
And don't forget to buy my album tomorrow.
Yes. And your band camp there. Yes. I did just want to ask you before we go for people who maybe are joining. The first one I saw was about pharma. Are there other pharma community sites you'd like to direct us to or working groups or where other people can get involved?
So, I'll be the plug for R&Pharma. So, the R&Pharma conference is in the fall. And it's a great conference. It's very like a domain specific RStudio conference.
So, people are there to present on how they solve problems with R, rather than focusing on the sciencey bits. But it's a really great conference.
I should also plug RStudio conference and the birds of a feather for pharma, right?
Yes. So, we do have the RStudio conference coming up the end of July. So, there'll be birds of a feather groups for each industry or based on your interests. And so, pharma is definitely a big one there. I know there's a few other working groups through the R Consortium, too. I can't find the exact links right now. So, I'm just going to put the general link there.
It's under working groups in R Consortium. There's one on submission using R. There's one. Sorry, let me.
I just put the working groups and then the one I just remembered R validation hub as well.
Exactly. So, there's R tables for regulatory submission as well. And, you know, so these are and fuse is the other one. Actually, when I think about it, it has a stream for R.
Fuse in the past has been more kind of centric, but I think it's gradually migrating over to having more stuff with R.
Awesome. Thanks so much, Mike. If anybody else on the call has other links or resources to share, feel free.
This is a bit of a ways out now, but we do also have an RCU of pharma meetup on May 17th, and it's going to be streamed on YouTube live.
So, I'll just share that link here, too. And again, all these links shared in the chat, I'll kind of consolidate and put with the recording that goes up to YouTube as well.
Thank you so much, Mike, for jumping on and sharing all this information with us.
Thank you.